Revue suisse de Zoologie 1 19 (2): 189-193; juin 2012

A new eyeless species of Howdeniola Osella, 1980 from Ecuador
(Coleoptera, Curculionidae)

Christoph GERM ANN

Natur-Museum Luzern, Kasemenplatz 6, CH-6003 Luzern and Naturhistorisches
Museum der Burgergemeinde Bern, Bemastrasse 15, CH-3005 Bern.

E-mail : germann. chri stoph@gmail.com

A new eyeless species of Howdeniola Osella, 1980 from Ecuador
(Coleoptera, Curculionidae). - Howdeniola polled sp. nov. is described
from southern Ecuador. The fifth species of the Neotropic Howdeniola
Osella, 1980 represents the southernmost record of the genus, and the first
with no visible eye remnants. The single male specimen was caught in a pan
trap in the Podocarpus National Park at 2000 m a. s. 1. in a lower montane
rainforest.

Keywords: Cossoninae - eyeless species - taxonomy - South America -
Podocarpus National Park - Ecuador.

INTRODUCTION

The genus Howdeniola Osella, 1980 was originally placed into Molytinae, later
Howden (1992) moved it to Cossoninae. Alonso-Zarazaga & Lyal (1999) listed
Howdeniola in the tribe Dryotribini Le Conte, 1876 together with the supposed closely
related Micromimus Wollaston, 1873.

Howdeniola comprises four hitherto described species, all with vestigial eyes:
H. nitidipennis Osella, 1980 and H. sulcipennis Osella, 1980 - both from Colombia -
and H. margheritae Bello & Osella, 2008 and H. onorei Bello & Osella, 2008 - both
from northern Ecuador - (Osella 1980, Bello & Osella 2008).

Within a biodiversity sampling project in Podocarpus National Park in Ecuador
a single male specimen of an eyeless weevil was caught. This specimen shows the
typical characters of Howdeniola which are modified and summarized after Osella
(1980) and Howden (1992) as follows: (I) fore margin of epistoma overhanging mouth-
parts, (II) impunctate head abruptly different from rostrum, (III) eyes reduced or
lacking, (IV) scrobe latero- ventral, reaching to or near base of rostrum, (V) seven
articulated funiculus of the antenna, (VI), conspicuously elongated tibial uncus at outer
angle, (VII) scutellum dorsally not visible, (VIII) basal margin of elytra elevated, (IX)
shiny integument of the body.

In the following Howdeniola polled sp. nov. from southern Ecuador is
described.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

The male genital structures were extracted and dry glued on the mounting card.
The genital structures were photographed beneath glycerol with a 5-megapixel digital

Manuscript accepted 04.04.20 12
190

C. GERMANN

camera (Leica DFC425) under a stereomicroscope (Leica MZ16). The same camera
was used for the habitus pictures. The pictures are composites processed using the soft-
ware Imagic Image Access (Version 10) and then retouched using Adobe Photoshop
version 10.0.1 (Adobe Systems Incorporated). The body size was measured dorsally
from the apex of the elytra to the base of the rostrum.

Label data is reported literally, labels are separated by double slash (//), and own
remarks are added in rectangular brackets.

TAXONOMIC PART

Howdeniola polled sp. nov. Figs 1-6

Holotype: 6 ; (EC) Zamora Chinchipe: San Francisco, Reserva Biologica // San
Francisco, all trails, 2000m [m a.s.l.], 03°58'30"S 79°04 , 25”W, // 25/02/2009-3/03/2009 (PT)
[pan trap], leg. Marc Pollet & Anja De // Braekeleer, sorted by Marc Pollet - sample code:
EC/2009-3 6/MP&ADB-01 8 // [red label] Holotype Howdeniola polled sp. nov. des. C. Germann
2012.

REMARKS: The specimen was caught in a 5% formalin (= 2% formaldehyde)
fixative solution with detergent in the traps, and then stored in 70% alcohol. The
specimen was treated with Pepsin solution for preparation of the genital organs. The
holotype specimen is deposited in the RBINS (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural
Sciences).

Description: Habitus : Figs 1-2.

Size : 1.96 mm

Body colour, auburn, glossy.

Head, rostrum and antennae : Head (Fig. 3) globose, impunctate and glabrous,
abruptly different from rostrum. Eyes lacking. Rostrum about four times longer than
wide, elliptical in cross-section, dorsally sparsely punctate, epistoma glabrous and
impunctate, fore margin hanging over mouthparts. Scrobes latero- ventral, reaching to
the base. Antennal insertion bulged in dorsal view, antennae inserted at beginning of
apical third of rostrum. Antennal scape gradually enlarged, as long as funiculus.
Funiculus (Fig. 4) consisting of seven segments of following ratios (L/B): 1 st : 1.25;
2 nd : 0.9; 3 rd : 0.6; 4 th to 6 th : 0.5; 7 th : 2.0. Club oval, circular in cross-section, densely
clothed with long white setae, and sitting in the bowl-like 7 th segment.

Pronotum : Index (L/B): 1.53. Longer than wide, strongly constricted after the
first third, widest after the middle. Surface deeply punctate with interspaces of about
the size of punctation. Short bright hairs arise from punctation.

Elytra: Index (L/B): 1.76. Base narrower than pronotum, oval, lacking humeral
callus (apterous), widest before the middle, tapered towards base and conical towards
apex. Eight deeply punctate striae, intervals including suture narrow, elevated and
costate with minute adherent hairs. Intervals (excluding suture) 3, 5, 6 and 7 are in-
complete, not reaching the elytral apex. Five stemites, of which 3 and 4 are equal,
stemite 5 rounded towards apex, deeply punctate with bowed hairs and slightly bulged
in the middle.

Legs: Coxae separated from each other as follows: procoxae by less than !4 of
their diameter, mesocoxae by Vi and metacoxae by two times of their diameter. Femora
unarmed, punctate, short adherent bright hairs arise. Tibiae punctate with short adher-
HOWDENIOLA POLLETI SP. NOV.

191

Figs 1-2

Howdeniola polled sp. nov. (holotype). Habitus in lateral view (1) and dorsal view (2).

ent bright hairs. Inner side of tibiae set with raised bright hairs, fore tibiae with densely
standing raised bristles from the middle on. Apex of tibiae with long curved uncus at
outer apical angle, and short tooth at inner angle. Tarsi with three well visible tarsal
segments, fourth very short. Claw segment as long as first tarsal segment, claws minute
and simple.

Aedeagus (Figs 5-6): Apex of aedeagus asymmetrically pointed, ventrally hook-
like bowed. Median lobe containing a tubular sclerite diverging towards apophyses.

Differential Diagnosis: Howdeniola polled sp. nov. differs from all other
four above-mentioned members of the genus by the slender elytra with narrow and
costate intervals, the strongly constricted pronotum before its fore margin, and the
conspicuously pointed apex of the aedeagus.
192

C. GERM ANN

Howdeniola polled sp. nov. (holotype). (3) Head and anterior portion of pronotum in lateral
view. (4) Antenna. (Illustrations by C. Hochholdinger).

Key of the species of Howdeniola
Modified after Bello & Osella (2008: 473)

1 Elytra smooth, shiny. Pronotum with small and widely space punctation.

Colombia (Quindio) nitidipennis Osella, 1980

Elytra with punctate striae not or faintly shiny. Pronotum with dense
punctation 2

2 Elytra globose, strongly striate. Pronotum rounded laterally. Colombia

(Saladido) sulcipennis Osella (1980)

Elytra less globose. Pronotum cylindrical 3

3 Intervals on Elytra flat, smooth. Aedeagus widened with a cordiform

apex. Ecuador (Pichincha, Cerro Blanco) onorei Bello & Osella 2008

Intervals slightly cariniform. Aedeagus elongate pointed 4

4 Antennae inserted at apical fifth of rostrum. Vestigial eyes. Pronotum
constricted before fore margin. Elytra more oval, with long raised setae.

Ecuador (Pichincha, Otonga) margheritae Bello & Osella 2008

Antennae inserted at beginning of apical third of rostrum. Eyes lacking.
Pronotum strongly constricted before fore margin. Elytra more elongate,

with minute adherent hairs. Ecuador (Zamora Chinchipe, San Francisco)
polled sp. nov.

DERIVATIO NOMINIS: The new species Howdeniola polled sp. nov. is named
after its collector, dear colleague and renowned dipterist Dr. Marc Pollet (Brussels,
Belgium).

BlONOMY: Howdeniola polled sp. nov. was collected in pan traps, these were
dug into the soil until their upper rim. The biome at the altitude of 2000 m a. s. 1. can
be considered as lower montane rainforest (written communication M. Pollet).

Distribution*. Howdeniola polled sp. nov. represents the southernmost find of
the genus. Furthermore an undescribed Howdeniola was recorded from Costa Rica
HOWDENIOLA POLLETI SP. NOV.

193

0.25 mm

Figs 5-6

Howdeniola polled sp. nov. (holotype). Aedeagus in lateral view (5) and ventral view (6).

(Rancho Quemado, Osa, Puntarenas, leg. F.A. Quesada, det. R. Anderson; record from
IABIN (Red Interamericana de Information sobre Biodiversidad)). These further
records obviously indicate that many more species of this genus will be discovered in
this large area.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thanks go to Marc Pollet for the invitation to study the collected samples of
Curculionoidea from Podocarpus National Park, Ecuador. Further thanks go to the host
agencies of the biodiversity inventory project RBINS (Royal Belgian Institute of
Natural Sciences), EDIT (European Distributed Institute of Taxonomy) and DFG RU-
816 (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Research Unit 816). The sampling was
supported by the Leopold III Fund and by the Fund for Scientific Research - Flanders.

REFERENCES

Alonso-Zarazaga, M. A. & Lyal, C. H. C. 1999. A World Catalogue of Families and Genera
of Curculionoidea (Insecta: Coleoptera). (Excepting Scolytidae and Platypodidae). Ento -
mopraxis, Barcelona , 315 pp.

Bello, C., & Osella, G. 2008. Two new species of Howdeniola Osella (1980) from Ecuador
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae: Cossoninae) (pp. 469-476). In: Giachino P. M., (ed.). Bio-
diversity of South America. I. Memoirs on biodiversity , vol. 1. 496 pp.

Howden, A. T. 1992. Review of the New World eyeless weevils with uncinate tibiae (Coleo -
ptera, Curculionidae; Molytinae, Cryptorhynchinae, Cossoninae). Memoirs of the Ento -
mological Society of Canada , 124: (162) 1-76.

Osella, G. 1980. Nuovi Curculionidi ciechi della regione neotropicale (Coleoptera). Fragmenta
Entomologica, Roma. 15 (2): 365-422.
