190

C. GERMANN

camera (Leica DFC425) under a stereomicroscope (Leica MZ16). The same camera
was used for the habitus pictures. The pictures are composites processed using the soft-
ware Imagic Image Access (Version 10) and then retouched using Adobe Photoshop
version 10.0.1 (Adobe Systems Incorporated). The body size was measured dorsally
from the apex of the elytra to the base of the rostrum.

Label data is reported literally, labels are separated by double slash (//), and own
remarks are added in rectangular brackets.

TAXONOMIC PART

Howdeniola polled sp. nov. Figs 1-6

Holotype: 6 ; (EC) Zamora Chinchipe: San Francisco, Reserva Biologica // San
Francisco, all trails, 2000m [m a.s.l.], 03°58'30"S 79°04 , 25”W, // 25/02/2009-3/03/2009 (PT)
[pan trap], leg. Marc Pollet &amp; Anja De // Braekeleer, sorted by Marc Pollet - sample code:
EC/2009-3 6/MP&amp;ADB-01 8 // [red label] Holotype Howdeniola polled sp. nov. des. C. Germann
2012.

REMARKS: The specimen was caught in a 5% formalin (= 2% formaldehyde)
fixative solution with detergent in the traps, and then stored in 70% alcohol. The
specimen was treated with Pepsin solution for preparation of the genital organs. The
holotype specimen is deposited in the RBINS (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural
Sciences).

Description: Habitus : Figs 1-2.

Size : 1.96 mm

Body colour, auburn, glossy.

Head, rostrum and antennae : Head (Fig. 3) globose, impunctate and glabrous,
abruptly different from rostrum. Eyes lacking. Rostrum about four times longer than
wide, elliptical in cross-section, dorsally sparsely punctate, epistoma glabrous and
impunctate, fore margin hanging over mouthparts. Scrobes latero- ventral, reaching to
the base. Antennal insertion bulged in dorsal view, antennae inserted at beginning of
apical third of rostrum. Antennal scape gradually enlarged, as long as funiculus.
Funiculus (Fig. 4) consisting of seven segments of following ratios (L/B): 1 st : 1.25;
2 nd : 0.9; 3 rd : 0.6; 4 th to 6 th : 0.5; 7 th : 2.0. Club oval, circular in cross-section, densely
clothed with long white setae, and sitting in the bowl-like 7 th segment.

Pronotum : Index (L/B): 1.53. Longer than wide, strongly constricted after the
first third, widest after the middle. Surface deeply punctate with interspaces of about
the size of punctation. Short bright hairs arise from punctation.

Elytra: Index (L/B): 1.76. Base narrower than pronotum, oval, lacking humeral
callus (apterous), widest before the middle, tapered towards base and conical towards
apex. Eight deeply punctate striae, intervals including suture narrow, elevated and
costate with minute adherent hairs. Intervals (excluding suture) 3, 5, 6 and 7 are in-
complete, not reaching the elytral apex. Five stemites, of which 3 and 4 are equal,
stemite 5 rounded towards apex, deeply punctate with bowed hairs and slightly bulged
in the middle.

Legs: Coxae separated from each other as follows: procoxae by less than !4 of
their diameter, mesocoxae by Vi and metacoxae by two times of their diameter. Femora
unarmed, punctate, short adherent bright hairs arise. Tibiae punctate with short adher-
